A Web of Gold 

I.
For the first time in history, human beings verge on creating and capturing a new type of raw material: digital data. More specifically, data these networked citizens have created themselves. Whereas before all the manpower and horsepower in all the world could only harness the natural resources of the earth itself, when financiers could dream only of digging deeply into the earth to extract the leftovers cast aside over the course of nature’s time, we now imagine a coming world built according to human design and responsive to our touch. This data sharing and output will define us. This is an age of networks, an age of massive amounts of information, a time of using technology to seize the social high ground, of data and how we share it.

This new artificial resource, so to speak, is a combination of human psychology, marketing, advanced engineering and computer science, and commerce. It involves the use of familiar terminology to describe new concepts. Like natural resources of the earth, information is physical. Like them, it must be treated and judged by quality, its origin and consistency evaluated. Machines must take it in and digest its contents. Its rawness must be manipulated by professionals and polished to a high sheen.

Much as natural resources like copper and gold have been mined for centuries, in this novel kind of science of the artificial, undoubtedly the mining and harvesting of data will create barons and build massive wealth for the fortunate few. The value creation and capture that underlies the idea of digital data is set to revolutionize our society, and could potentially veer toward ruin. Certainly there will be some centralization in business, some attempts at vertical integration and monopoly, the time-tested and true tools of the would-be titan and the empire builder. Yet it has the power to bring society closer to a period of common prosperity, a time of mutual aid and more diverse sources of personal income. We will all have a claim to stake; we ourselves make the gold.

Our time spent online is inherently valuable, and our data—most of the information captured or digested online about us, especially that which is generated by us—must be recognized as a new form of fundamental property right under the law. Our data is ours to manage and keep, to sell and share. The coming age of digital information and data sharing stands to make more entrepreneurial sorts of us all. We will decide to let advertisers present messages to us, or marketers reach out to us—or not, and choose to receive nothing in exchange.

II.
Networked citizens, due some level of small compensation from the marketing of goods and services to them, and perhaps other sources, will band together to take part in data unions or data pools, much as insurance pools exist already in order to provide lower costs and greater benefits for all members, much as labor unions seek to protect and promote their members’ interests. Similarly, data unions will pool members of similar attitudes toward marketing exposure or privacy intrusion, as people care more or less about what information is sold or shared and how much they could stand to gain in compensation.

Perhaps such data unions will negotiate special group shopping deals for members, such as now happens in select areas when shoppers with smartphones receive pings from beacons located in the stores they’re passing by offering them ads or discounts. Perhaps various unions would want to receive every deal available to maximize the potential income or savings, whereas others might want to opt out altogether and keep their privacy intact—they might view some meager incentives as not worth the hassle. The type of affiliate marketing now common online with retailers like Amazon could be inspiration for what happens here. Economies of scale would compel merchants to negotiate data-access deals, without which union members would be inaccessible to them. Beyond this, there would probably be other terms negotiated by these pooled members over time; these groupings might serve as a new data-age marker of identity or belonging. The rise of such digital-age data unions will probably extend to other areas of life and society.

Our membership in a data pool or data union will be mediated by a personal API. This individualized application programming interface will feature a learner algorithm that helps it act as a high-end virtual assistant in many ways, conducting scheduled commercial transactions, for example, performing automated tasks, organizing communications with other online entities or individuals, uploading content to be stored in the cloud, or interfacing with software in order to reduce the overwhelming noise and cognitive load of going online. Such a filtering service will be indispensable for networked citizens, so they do not disappear into the deluge of informational ephemera the future promises. This type of machine learning algorithm will be available in years to come, possibly combining parts of the evolutionary, Bayesian, and analogizing approaches. Writ large, it will be capable of dealing with the rest of the world on behalf of its human owner without a great deal of supervision—provided its owner feels comfortable letting it.

 Its activities will perhaps be recorded in some kind of add-only immutable ledger—such as Bitcoin uses—or sidechain that enables its owner to verify its work and ensure their satisfaction. Using such a system, the conditions for trust can be created. This will prove helpful when it comes to matters like settling accounts, paying taxes, and keeping records. (In the future, almost incomprehensible tax codes will matter less because your algorithm will do your calculations and present them to you so you can check its work.) Such unalterable ledgers will become common in coming years, as data proliferates and publicly viewable interfaces are needed to see what is stored or transacted by governments and other entities. These will also help provide the necessary means to pay small micro-transactions for online content such as journalism, music, and other media, to pay respect, as it were, as a sort of digital tipping of the hat or gesture of approval.

III.
Extending the idea of paying respect online, software in the coming years will provide the means to improve signature human strengths—the kind not much thought of or encouraged by today’s software. Are we made more focused now, by the use of smartphones or streaming TV shows? Are we more or less distracted? More or less sedentary, or overweight? Do we act smarter, or maybe more wisely? Do we have more willpower? Has present-day software endowed us with a greater sense of empathy?

Most would probably say no, maybe that it’s a mixed bag, yet the near future will correct this if we push technology to do so and establish this as the kind of “positive tech” future we want. Coming technology can usher us into an age of human-centric software, when the purpose of online applications is to help us all in putting our best self forward and enabling us individually to flourish rather than enabling our baser instincts like the desire for petty, momentary trivia. We will have the ability to express gratitude online, to pay respect to those who’ve helped us in order to construct a kind of digital trail of character references, automatic recommendation letters for us so we might use our contributions to online communities and our volunteer or charitable activities to win future opportunities.

 Pooled together, data unions offer an alternative to fighting madly in the dark against being taken advantage of on our own. We will be able to join them for all the benefits that economies of scale and collaborative networking have to offer, and these data unions will compete to offer the best deal to the networked citizens whose membership they seek, just as commercial entities and anyone else wanting the digital attention of any member of such a data union will need to first negotiate to secure data-access rights and be allowed to pass through members’ personal API filters for screening out intrusions. Online commerce will reorient around this pole, and, in a feedback loop that perpetuates itself, this concept will further the merger between online and real life. Here the idea of relational capitalism, where past track records—the longer, the more detailed, the better—and past behaviors affect the deals or prices today, might spur new developments.

IV.
The question ultimately becomes this: what kind of online world do we want to live in? Are we building the house in which we want to spend our days? More and more, there is no separation between what happens online and in life: online is real life. What we do online is who we are. How we act online is what we support. Where we spend money is what we believe in. The coming rush of data can overwhelm our understanding and, as we struggle to understand its ramifications and just what exactly it all means, a fortunate few can strike it rich by drilling down early on and mining in the right ways to capture all the value they can while the majority of us procrastinate.

There is a danger here. In our desire for simplicity, we can outsource our thinking to experts, but their opinions could be long in coming and could also end up being wrong or unhelpful. The issues revolving around the Internet and the dawning of this age of massive data affect every networked citizen in the world, and are too important to leave to engineers. In fact, Claude Shannon, one of computing’s forefathers, thought meaning was irrelevant as far as engineering was concerned—better to plow ahead technically, while leaving meaning behind to deal with some other time. Perhaps then, not now. Such an approach has no place in the world we’re moving into now. Instead, the time to begin grasping the pieces of the future that are becoming clear is today, when we can influence what might transpire tomorrow. Without the means to channel the benefits of information usage and data capture to majorities of people, the Internet could present our future to us with golden chains rather than a web of gold to enable a more shared split of the overall benefit, golden fetters to keep us bound to a handful of all-powerful companies with sharp fangs and a nasty bite, indulging their desire to keep things locked up tight in just the bare minimum number of hands necessary.

These are the times we live in. Our age is one of great change and reordering, and we must embrace the certainties there are and respond to probabilities in accordance with how likely they are. When such reordering happens, there’s a chance to work out a new way of organizing things, a chance to build new paradigms and make new meanings. The Internet is here to stay, and the age of data mining is only beginning. As it goes on, more and more meaning will be derived from these data. More and more value will be wrapped up in them. We know these facts to be true. How we respond to such truths is up to us.
